Document relaxation and speical section in zc extension (#349)
riscv-non-isa/riscv-elf-psabi-doc: riscv-elf.adoc

[[rv-section]]
.RISC-V-specific sections
[cols="3,3,3"]
[width=80%]
|===
| Name                       | Type                 | Attributes

| .riscv.attributes          | SHT_RISCV_ATTRIBUTES | none

> | .riscv.tbljalvec           | SHT_PROGBITS         | SHF_ALLOC + SHF_EXECINSTR

Reviewer: I still don't like that this is tbljalvec, ie TJV, but the CSR is JVT, there should be consistency throughout in what this extension, CSR, section and relaxation is called.

Reviewer 2: maybe this is leftover from the original name of that CSR, before we renamed it to JVT. I agree that consistency is much better.

Reviewer 3: I guess that the table needs to be aligned to a natural boundary. Was that mentioned somewhere in the doc?

Reviewer 4: Add a NOTE to mention that should at least align to 2 byte and suggest align to 4 byte?

@tariqkurd-repo any suggestion on alignment of the table?

Author: the alignment added. Thanks!

Reviewer 2: sorry for the slow repy @linsinan1995 , it needs to be at least 64-byte aligned as bits [5:0] of JVT aren't part of the address

Author: > sorry for the slow reply @linsinan1995 , it needs to be at least 64-byte aligned as bits [5:0] of JVT aren't part of the address, which agrees with what you wrote

Hi, @tariqkurd-repo . The alignment requirement was added in the latest commit.
```
+++.riscv.tbljalvec+++ is a linker-created section to store table jump
target addresses. The minimum alignment of this section is 64 bytes.
```

Reviewer: So everything is consistently table jump now, except for the CSR...

Reviewer 2: is there any reason not to replace the string `tbljalvec` with `jvt`, as I did in the Zc spec many months ago? I vote for consistency.

Reviewer 2: Hi @linsinan1995 should we rename `tbljalvec` to `jvt`? Then can we merge this PR?

[[rv-section]]
.RISC-V-specific sections
[cols="3,3,3"]
[width=80%]
|===
| Name                       | Type                 | Attributes

| .riscv.attributes          | SHT_RISCV_ATTRIBUTES | none

> | .text.riscv.tbljalvec      | SHT_PROGBITS         | SHF_ALLOC + SHF_EXECINSTR

Reviewer 4: I also prefer that should not prefixed with `.text`

| Name                       | Type                 | Attributes

| .riscv.attributes          | SHT_RISCV_ATTRIBUTES | none

> | .text.riscv.tbljalvec      | SHT_PROGBITS         | none

Reviewer 4: Attribute should be `alloc and execute`, which same as text section.

  expected size saving from function-call-related relaxations and the size of jump
  table will be taken into account. If there is no additional gain, then table
  jump relaxation is ignored. Otherwise, this relaxation is switched on.
  <<compress-tailcall-relax, Compressed Tail Call Relaxation>> and
  <<compress-func-call-relax, Compressed Function Call Relaxation>> are
  always prefered during relaxation, since table jump relaxation has no
  extra size saving over these two relaxations and might bring a performance
  overhead.

  Condition:: The `zcmt` extension is required, the linker output is not
  position-independent and the rd operand of a function call or jump instruction
  is `X0` or `RA`.

  Relaxation::
  - Instruction sequence associated with `R_RISCV_CALL` or `R_RISCV_CALL_PLT`
  can be rewritten to a table jump instruction.
  - Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_JAL` can be rewritten to a table
  jump instruction.
  Example::
+
--
Relaxation candidate:
[,asm]
----
    auipc ra, 0           # R_RISCV_CALL (symbol), R_RISCV_RELAX (symbol)
    jalr  ra, ra, 0

    auipc ra, 0           # R_RISCV_CALL_PLT (symbol), R_RISCV_RELAX (symbol)
    jalr  x0, ra, 0

>     jal ra, 0             # R_RISCV_JAL (symbol), R_RISCV_RELAX (symbol)

Reviewer 3: Is it allowed or prohibited to relax

```
jal x0, 0      # R_RISCV_JAL (symbol), R_RISCV_RELAX (symbol)
```

to

```
cm.jt <index-for-symbol>
```

?

Reviewer 4: Plz add example :)

Author: added it. Thanks.

Reviewer 3: You seems to forgot to add the following line

```
cm.jt <index-for-symbol>
```

Author: > You seem to forgot to add the following line
> 
> ```
> cm.jt <index-for-symbol>
> ```

Added. Thanks a lot!

----

Relaxation result:
[,asm]
----
    cm.jalt  <index-for-symbol>

    cm.jt    <index-for-symbol>

    cm.jalt  <index-for-symbol>
----
--

> NOTE: The `zcmt` extension is incompatible with the position-independent mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: The `zcmt` extension cannot be used in position-independent binaries.
```

NOTE: Jump or call instructions with the rd operand `RA` will be relaxed into
`cm.jalt` and instructions with the rd operand `X0` will be relaxed into
`cm.jt`. The table jump section holds target addresses for these two
instructions separately. More details are available in the _ZC* extension
specification_ <<riscv-zc-extension-group>>.

NOTE: This relaxation requires programs to initialize the `jvt` CSR with the
address of the `__tbljalvec_base$` symbol before executing table jump
instructions. It is recommended to initialize `jvt` CSR immediately after
<<gp-relax-asm,global pointer initialization>>.
[,asm]
----
    # Recommended way to initialize the jvt CSR.

> 2:  auipc a0, %pcrel_hi(__tbljalvec_base$)
>     addi  a0, a0, %pcrel_lo(2b)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1:  auipc a0, %pcrel_hi(__tbljalvec_base$)
    addi  a0, a0, %pcrel_lo(1b)
```

----
--

==== Table Jump Relaxation

  Target Relocation::: R_RISCV_CALL, R_RISCV_CALL_PLT, R_RISCV_JAL.

  Description:: This relaxation type can relax a function call or jump
  instruction into a single table jump instruction with the index of the target
  address in table jump section (<<rv-section>>).
  Before relaxation, the linker scans all relocations and calculates whether
  additional gains can be obtained by using table jump instructions, where
  expected size saving from function-call-related relaxations and the size of jump
  table will be taken into account. If there is no additional gain, then table
  jump relaxation is ignored. Otherwise, this relaxation is switched on.
  <<compress-tailcall-relax, Compressed Tail Call Relaxation>> and
  <<compress-func-call-relax, Compressed Function Call Relaxation>> are
  always prefered during relaxation, since table jump relaxation has no
  extra size saving over these two relaxations and might bring a performance
  overhead.

>   Condition:: The `zcmt` extension is required, the linker output is not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Condition:: The `Zcmt` extension is required, the linker output is not
```

Author: Hi @jrtc27 . I keep some formatting issues unchanged since the abi spec also uses them in the same way. e.g.  extensions are lowercases and the register names in relaxation section are all capitalized. Maybe @kito-cheng or someone can help fix them with another PR.

Reviewer 4: I am OK to fix this with other stuffs later

  position-independent, the rd operand of a function call or jump instruction

>   is `X0` or `RA`, and table jump instructions can bring extra size saving.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is `x0` or `ra`, and table jump instructions can bring extra size saving.
```
Only can? Surely will?

Reviewer 4: > Only can? Surely will?

My understanding is that means we should not apply this relaxation if it can't bring extra size saving.

Reviewer: Yes, but this is under Condition::, and the condition is that it will

Author: Thanks. I removed this line from the condition since it is not really a condition. (at least we could force the linker to generate the table in corev toolchain.)

  Relaxation::
  - Instruction sequence associated with `R_RISCV_CALL` or `R_RISCV_CALL_PLT`
  can be rewritten to a table jump instruction.
  - Instruction associated with `R_RISCV_JAL` can be rewritten to a table
  jump instruction.
  Example::
+
--
Relaxation candidate:
[,asm]
----
    auipc ra, 0           # R_RISCV_CALL (symbol), R_RISCV_RELAX (symbol)
    jalr  ra, ra, 0

>     auipc ra, 0           # R_RISCV_CALL (symbol), R_RISCV_RELAX (symbol)

Reviewer: No _PLT example?

    jalr  x0, ra, 0

    jal ra, 0             # R_RISCV_JAL (symbol), R_RISCV_RELAX (symbol)
----

Relaxation result:
[,asm]
----
    cm.jalt  <index-for-symbol>

    cm.jt    <index-for-symbol>

    cm.jalt  <index-for-symbol>
----
--

> NOTE: The linker may report an error if the `zcmt` extension and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: The linker may report an error if the `Zcmt` extension and
```

If you're going to talk about linker errors, say "should" not "may", but I would argue we shouldn't be prescribing diagnostics and instead just stating incompatibilities in a spec.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. The line about the linker behaviour was removed and only `incompatible with PIC` is mentioned.

> NOTE: The linker will report an error if the `zcmt` extension and

Reviewer 4: `will` is too strong for a non-normative test, I would suggest using `may` here.

Author: Changed. Thanks!

position-independent output are requested at the same time.

> NOTE: Jump or call instructions with the rd operand `RA` will relaxed into
> `cm.jalt` and instructions with the rd operand `X0` will be relaxed into
> `cm.jt`. Table jump section holds target addresses for these two
> instructions separately. More details on _ZC extension specification_ <<riscv-zc>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Jump or call instructions with the rd operand `ra` will relaxed into
`cm.jalt` and instructions with the rd operand `x0` will be relaxed into
`cm.jt`. The table jump section holds target addresses for these two
instructions separately. More details are available in the _Zc extension specification_ <<riscv-zc>>.
```

Also Zc isn't an extension, you have Zc* as a set of extensions.

> NOTE: This relaxation requires programs to initialize the `jvt` csr with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: This relaxation requires programs to initialize the `jvt` CSR with the
```

> address of `__tbljalvec_base$` symbol before executing table jump instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
address of the `__tbljalvec_base$` symbol before executing table jump instructions.
```

> Initialization should happen after <<gp-relax-asm,global pointer initialization>>.

Reviewer: Why? If it's in .option norelax then it doesn't matter, and if it's in .option relax then it's subject to the same rules as any other lla.

[,asm]
----

>     # Recommended way to initialize the jvt csr.

Reviewer: Use a caption not a comment

    # Routine to initialize `gp` register.
    .option push
    .option norelax
1:  auipc gp, %pcrel_hi(__global_pointer$)
    addi  gp, gp, %pcrel_lo(1b)

>     .option pop

Reviewer: This isn't needed here and duplicates existing code

2:  auipc a0, %pcrel_hi(__tbljalvec_base$)
    addi  a0, a0, %pcrel_lo(2b)

>     csrw jvt, a0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    csrw  jvt, a0
```

----
--

==== Table Jump Relaxation

  Target Relocation::: R_RISCV_CALL, R_RISCV_CALL_PLT, R_RISCV_JAL.

  Description:: This relaxation type can relax a function call or jump
  instruction into a single table jump instruction with the index of target
  address in table jump section (<<rv-section>>).
  Before relaxation, the linker scans all relocations and calculates whether
  additional gains can be obtained by using the table jump instruction, where
  expected size saving from related call relaxations and the size of jump
  table will be taken into account. If there is no additional gain, then the
  table jump relaxation is ignored. Otherwise, the relaxation is switched on.
  <<compress-tailcall-relax, Compressed Tail Call Relaxation>> and
  <<compress-func-call-relax, Compressed Function Call Relaxation>> are
  always prefered during relaxation, since the table jump relaxation has no
  extra size saving over these two relaxations and might bring a performance
  overhead.

  Condition:: Zcmt extension is required, rd operand of the function call or
  jump instruction should be `X0` or `RA`, and table jump instructions can

>   bring extra size saving.

Reviewer 4: Add one more condition here: disable with position-independent mode.

Reviewer 2: Hi @kito-cheng do I need to modify the Zc spec as well, or are all the details covered by this PR?

Reviewer 3: Rather than disabling, it is better to make the linker to report an error if Zcmt and position-independent output are requested at the same time.

Reviewer 4: @tariqkurd-repo I think that should be part of psABI spec, have a note in Zc spec is plus :)

Reviewer 4: @rui314: I would like use non-normative word here: `incompatible with position-independent mode.` and add a note `NOTE: Linker may report error when Zcmt extension is present and position-independent output are requested at the same time.`

* [[[riscv-unpriv]]] "The RISC-V Instruction Set Manual, Volume I: User-Level
ISA, Document", Editors Andrew Waterman and Krste Asanovi´c,
RISC-V International.

> * [[[riscv-zc]]] "ZC extension specification"

Reviewer: Same as above
